Short version (#3)
CDCgov/cfa-tnd-ve-widget: docs/primer_short.md

# Test-negative design: short primer

## Vaccine efficacy

VE is the fractional reduction in the probability of an adverse outcome due to vaccination. For purposes of a test-negative design (TND) study, we further define VE to be:

- A direct effect, that is, the counterfactual reduction in risk that would occur if a single individual were vaccinated or not, and not the population-level effect of reducing transmission via a vaccination program
- VE against infection, written $\mathrm{VE}_S$ in HLS
- Binary: Individuals are considered vaccinated or not (e.g., people who were vaccinated shortly before the outcome of interest may be classified as "unvaccinated" in the study, because they are presumed to have not yet been protected)
- Conditioned on some probability or amount of exposure to disease

Thus:

$$

> \mathrm{VE} = 1 - \frac{P[\text{infected} | \text{vaccinated}]}{P[\text{infected} | \text{unvaccinated}]}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\mathrm{VE} = 1 - \frac{P[\text{infected & progressed} | \text{vaccinated}]}{P[\text{infected & progressed} | \text{unvaccinated}]}
```

\end{align*}
```

The actual values from the TND trial are affected by test performance:

```math
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{E}[C_{VP}] &= p_\mathrm{sens} \mathbb{E}[C_{VI}] + (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \mathbb{E}[C_{VX}] \\
\mathbb{E}[C_{VN}] &= (1 - p_\mathrm{sens}) \mathbb{E}[C_{VI}] + p_\mathrm{spec} \mathbb{E}[C_{VX}] \\
\mathbb{E}[C_{UP}] &= p_\mathrm{sens} \mathbb{E}[C_{UI}] + (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \mathbb{E}[C_{UX}] \\
\mathbb{E}[C_{UN}] &= (1 - p_\mathrm{sens}) \mathbb{E}[C_{UI}] + p_\mathrm{spec} \mathbb{E}[C_{UX}] \\
\end{align*}
```

#### Odds ratio estimator

An estimator of the desired quantity is:

```math
\hat{\mathrm{VE}} = 1 - \frac{C_{VP} C_{UN}}{C_{UP} C_{VN}}
```

When there is perfect test performance, the TND counts reduce to the actual disease status counts, e.g., $C_{VP} = C_{VI}$. In this case, the expected value of the estimator is:

```math
\mathbb{E}\left[\hat{\mathrm{VE}}\right] = 1 - \frac{P[E|V] \times P[I|E,V] \times P[S|I,V] \times P[S|X,U]}{P[E|U] \times P[I|E,U] \times P[S|I,U] \times P[S|X,V]}
```

If we further assume that:

1. the probability of exposure is identical among the vaccinated and unvaccinated, i.e., $P[E|V] = P[E|U]$, and

> 2. vaccination does not affect progression to testing among the uninfected, i.e., $P[S|X,U]=P[S|X,V]$

Reviewer: The algebra works out! Great!

I will restate my case for separating disease-progression-given-infection (purely immunological) from test-seeking-given-progression (purely behavioral). Your mathematical formulation makes this easier to discuss now!

As it stands, I see two problems with your derivation:

1) The term P[S | I] includes both immunology and behavior (see line 42). Because both P[S | I,V] and P[S | I,U] play a role in the final simplified estimator, this means your VE_SP estimate incorporates behavioral differences between the I,V and the I,U populations. But I suspect most people would rather interpret VE_SP as the purely immunological effect of the vaccine, not incorporating the differential behavior of vaccinated vs. unvaccinated people.

2) You must assume that P[S | X,V] = P[S | X,U]. But this is probably not true. Those who choose to get vaccinated are probably also more likely to seek a test (regardless of whether they are actually infected, because people seek a test before they know the cause of their respiratory distress).

So instead, say that P[S | I] = P[P | I] * P[S | P], where the P = progression to severe symptoms. Essentially, seeking a test given infection has been decomposed into two steps: progressing immunologically then seeking behaviorally. 

Now you have:
```math
\mathbb{E}\left[\hat{\mathrm{VE}}\right] = 1 - \frac{P[E|V] \times P[I|E,V] \times P[P|I,V] \times P[S|P,V] \times P[S|X,U]}{P[E|U] \times P[I|E,U] \times P[P|I,U] \times P[S|P,U] \times P[S|X,V]}
```
 
The first terms in the numerator and denominator cancel out because of your assumption of equal exposure. The final two terms in the numerator and denominator also cancel out, because we assume that P[S | P,V] = P[S | X,V] and P[S | P,U] = P[S | X,U]. This is a reasonable assumption, because people don't know whether they are infected or not when they seek a test - all they know is that they are in respiratory distress, regardless of whether the cause is P or X. Vaccination status may affect their test-seeking behavior, but that doesn't matter - the cancellation still happens.

You are left with: 
```math
\mathbb{E}\left[\hat{\mathrm{VE}}\right] = 1 - \frac{P[I|E,V] \times P[P|I,V]}{P[I|E,U] \times P[P|I,U]} = 1 - \frac{P[P|E,V]}{P[P|E,U]}
```

This solves both problems above: 1) it estimates only the immunological effect of the vaccine in preventing infection and/or progression, and 2) it never requires assuming that vaccinated and unvaccinated people have identical test-seeking behavior.

Author: I think I finally understand what you've been saying. Let check my understanding.

There are two disease progressions (where I'm changing my notation again, I think for the last time):

- exposed $E$ to infected $I$ to infected symptomatic $S_I$ to tested $T$
- not infected $X$ to uninfected symptomatic $S_X$ to tested $T$

The expected value of the TND estimator is:

$$
1 - \frac{P[E|V] \times P[I|E,V] \times P[S_I|I,V] \times P[T|S_I,V] \times P[S_X|U] \times P[T|S_X,U]}{\text{same but with U and V swapped}}
$$

If we assume:

1. Equal exposure rates: $P[E|V] = P[E|U]$ ==> first term drops
2. Non-infection symptoms arise with the same probability among the vaccinated and unvaccinated: $P[S_X|V]=P[S_X|U]$ ==> term 5 cancels
3. Vaccinated people seek tests with some probability when they have symptoms, regardless of whether those symptoms are caused by infection or not: $P[T|S_I,V] = P[T|S_X,V]$, and ditto for unvaccinated people: $P[T|S_I,U] = P[T|S_X,U]$ ==> terms 4 & 6 drop

then this reduces to:

$$
1 - \frac{P[S_I|E,V]}{P[S_I|E,U]}
$$

which is $\mathrm{VE}_{SP}$ if we take "P" to be progression to symptoms.

I'm not sure why this took me so long. I think I needed to do it in my own notation?

Author: This is going to be a pain if you violate any of these assumptions, though, because they you need to separate input $P[S_I|I]$ and $P[T|S_I]$, and similarly $P[S_X]$ and $P[T|S_X]$, into a simulation like in the widget. I'll need to figure that out.

But at least we're on the same page now!

Reviewer: Bingo! Your latest explanation looks exactly right to me!

Extra parameters can be a pain, but they can also be super interesting. For example, it seems intuitive that VE_SP will become biased if the transmission dynamics of the focal pathogen I differ from the dynamics of other causes of symptoms X. But interestingly, this bias only arises if vaccination lowers $P[I | E]$. On the other hand, if vaccination only lowers $P[S_I | I]$ without affecting  $P[I | E]$, then different dynamics aren't a problem, because the difference is identical between the V and U populations.

But we can worry about if/how such oddities should feature in the widget later. Glad we're reconciled!

Author: I'm going to break this out in #9

# Test-negative design: short primer

## Draft outline

- What is VE
  - Known biases with any VE estimator
- What is a TND study
- There are 8 kinds of people:
  - Vaccinated vs. not
  - Infected with the focal pathogen vs. not
  - Seek a test vs. not

>   - Test positive vs. not

Reviewer: Considering "infected with the focal pathogen vs. not" and "test positive vs. not" separately implies that these are not synonymous. That is, you assume that a test can "lie" and therefore you must consider sensitivity and specificity. 

Do we ever also consider that people might "lie" about vaccination status? Even misremembering the date of vaccination (e.g. 10 days vs. 17 days ago) can change someone's effective vaccination status. Do we need to consider sensitivity and specificity of vaccination status self-reporting?

Perhaps this is important. Or perhaps it's just a nit-picky reminder that there are more than just 4 classifications of people that you can make, and therefore we need some principles to govern which details we in- vs. exclude from consideration.

Finally, if we stick with 4 binary classifications, that's 16 kinds of people, right?

Author: re: vaccination status. This is an interesting point; I'll break it off into another issue, to see what this does.

If only unvaccinated people claimed to be vaccinated, then this would down-bias estimated VE in a pretty straightforward way. But if vaccinated people forget or don't have their records checked correctly (which seems the more likely thing), then it seems like this should also down-bias VE? I'll check on that.

re: 16. good catch

Author: cf #6

- TND has access only to people who seek a test
- "Actual" VE is: [insert risk ratio math]
- TND estimator of VE is: [insert odds ratio math]
- Note that TND estimator is unbiased only when: [assumptions]
- Bias of TND estimator scales this way with underlying parameters: [discuss]

"HLS" refers to Halloran, Longini, and Struchiner _Design and Analysis of Vaccine Studies_.

## Vaccine efficacy

VE is the fractional reduction in the probability of an adverse outcome due to vaccination. For purposes of a test-negative design (TND) study, we further define VE to be:

- A direct effect, that is, the counterfactual reduction in risk that would occur if a single individual were vaccinated or not, and not the population-level effect of reducing transmission via a vaccination program

> - VE against infection, written $\mathrm{VE}_S$ in HLS

Reviewer: I disagree that VE_S is what TND estimates. Most people have some threshold of symptom severity that they must cross before they seek a test, or especially before they seek care at a facility where they will be tested. So the "seek a test vs. not" classification includes not only behavioral tendency, but also symptom severity. Because TND only includes those who seek a test, TND participants are strongly biased toward those with severe disease. So the TND VE estimate is likely closer to VE_SP than VE_S.

Author: This is important! We should make sure one of can convince the other one.

I started doing some math and need to think some more.

Author: I'll be curious when you look through my updated doc here. I think I need to assume that $\mu_{VI} = \mu_{UI}$, which implies that the vaccinated and unvaccinated have the same probability of progression from infection to symptoms (and also the same behavior to seek testing), which would imply that $\mathrm{VE}_{SP} = \mathrm{VE}_S$, i.e., there is no protection from the vaccination against progression.

Author: Belay that; I agree with you, this is VE_SP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- VE against infection and progression, written $\mathrm{VE}_SP$ in HLS
```

$$

## Test-negative design

A test-negative design (TND) is a study design that can be used to estimate VE. In a TND:

- The population of interest are those individuals who received a diagnostic test
- The main covariate of interest is vaccination status
- The outcome of interest is the test result (positive or negative)

The data available in a TND ultimately reduces to a 2x2 table of counts:

|               | Vaccinated | Unvaccinated |
| ------------- | ---------- | ------------ |
| Test positive | $C_{PV}$   | $C_{PU}$     |
| Test negative | $C_{NV}$   | $C_{NU}$     |

## Mathematical model

### Single-exposure model

- There is only one opportunity for exposure per individuals; individuals are either exposed or not
- Individuals are vaccinated with probability $v$
- Individuals are exposed with probability $\varepsilon_V$ or $\varepsilon_U$
- Exposed individuals are infected ($I$) with probability $\lambda_V$ or $\lambda_U$
- Infected individuals seek and receive a test with probability $\mu_{V|I}$ or $\mu_{U|I}$
  - Note that this probability represents a combination of developing symptoms, seeking healthcare, and receiving a test given that healthcare was sought

>   - $1-\mu_V/\mu_U$ is an example of VE against progression conditional on an earlier outcome, written $\mathrm{VE}_P$ in HLS

Reviewer: This appears to address my previous comment. But I fear that this formulation (i.e., measuring only VE_S with TND data, and rolling immunologically-controlled disease progression and behaviorally-controlled test seeking into one parameter) will lead to some unfortunate constraints when mathematically exploring the conditions that bias the TND estimator.

This is why I introduce the pi parameter in my longer primer. Even though immunologically-controlled disease progression is not truly a binary event, treating it as such to separate it from behaviorally-controlled test seeking can help the math be a little more illustrative, I suspect.

Author: The thing I struggle with separating infection->symptoms and symptoms->seeking is that these two things will always be perfectly confounded in a TND. We never see asymptomatic infecteds because we assume that anyone who is test positive and appears in the study (i.e., is "symptomatic") is in the study because they were infected.

So I guess I'm saying there's no such thing as symptom, except the thing that causes you to get entered into the study, which is circular.

I can see values both ways, pedagogically, either to say "these two Greek letters are different things, but look they always appear together in these equations, so the TND can't separate them" or my more complicated "there is no spoon"

Author: Update: after redoing some derivations, it seems like $\pi$ (infection -> symptoms) and $\mu$ (symptoms -> test) always go together in this math?

Confusingly, it seems like $\varepsilon$ and $\lambda$ do also

Author: I redid my notation! and math. Everything has changed.

- The test has imperfect sensitivity $p_\mathrm{sens}$ and specificity $p_\mathrm{spec}$

#### Quantities of interest

We are interested in VE against infection conditioned on exposure:

$$
1 - \frac{\lambda_V}{\lambda_U}
$$

In a population of size $n$, the TND supplies counts whose expected values are:

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{E}[C_{PV}] &= n v \left[\varepsilon_V \lambda_V \mu_{V|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_V \lambda_V) \mu_{V|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right] \\
\mathbb{E}[C_{NV}] &= n v \left[\varepsilon_V \lambda_V \mu_{V|I} (1 - p_\mathrm{sens}) + (1 - \varepsilon_V \lambda_V) \mu_{V|X} p_\mathrm{spec} \right] \\
\mathbb{E}[C_{PU}] &= n (1-v) \left[\varepsilon_U \lambda_U \mu_{U|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_U \lambda_U) \mu_{U|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right] \\
\mathbb{E}[C_{NU}] &= n (1-v) \left[\varepsilon_U \lambda_U \mu_{U|I} (1 - p_\mathrm{sens}) + (1 - \varepsilon_U \lambda_U) \mu_{U|X} p_\mathrm{spec} \right] \\
\end{align*}
$$

#### Risk ratio estimator

One estimator is:

$$
\hat{\mathrm{VE}}_\mathrm{RR} \equiv 1 - \frac{C_{PV} / (C_{PV} + C_{NV})}{C_{PU} / (C_{PU} + C_{NU})}

> $$

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render properly.

The expected value of this estimator is:

$$
\begin{align*}
\mathbb{E}\left[\hat{\mathrm{VE}}_\mathrm{RR}\right] &= 1 - \frac{nv \left[\varepsilon_V \lambda_V \mu_{V|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_V \lambda_V) \mu_{V|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right]}{n (1-v) \left[\varepsilon_U \lambda_U \mu_{U|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_U \lambda_U) \mu_{U|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right]} \frac{n(1-v)}{nv} \\
&= 1 - \frac{\left[\varepsilon_V \lambda_V \mu_{V|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_V \lambda_V) \mu_{V|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right]}{\left[\varepsilon_U \lambda_U \mu_{U|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_U \lambda_U) \mu_{U|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right]}
\end{align*}

> $$

Reviewer: These equations don't render properly.

This estimator is unbiased if:

- Exposure probabilities are identical (e.g., vaccination status is uncorrelated with contact networks): $\varepsilon_V = \varepsilon_U$
- Probability of receiving a test given infection is identical (i.e., vaccination does not protect against progression to symptomatic disease _and_ vaccination status is uncorrelated with healthcare seeking or probability of receiving a test given healthcare seeking)
- The test has perfect sensitivity and specificity

#### Odds ratio estimator

Another estimator is:

$$
\hat{\mathrm{VE}}_\mathrm{OR} = 1 - \frac{C_{PV} C_{NU}}{C_{PU} C_{NV}}

> $$

Reviewer: This equation does not render properly.

  &= 1 -
    \frac{n v \left[\varepsilon_V \lambda_V \mu_{V|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_V \lambda_V) \mu_{V|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right]}{n (1-v) \left[\varepsilon_U \lambda_U \mu_{U|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_U \lambda_U) \mu_{U|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right]}
    \times \frac{n (1-v) \left[\varepsilon_U \lambda_U \mu_{U|I} (1 - p_\mathrm{sens}) + (1 - \varepsilon_U \lambda_U) \mu_{U|X} p_\mathrm{spec} \right]}{n v \left[\varepsilon_V \lambda_V \mu_{V|I} (1 - p_\mathrm{sens}) + (1 - \varepsilon_V \lambda_V) \mu_{V|X} p_\mathrm{spec} \right]} \\
  &= 1 -
    \frac{
      \left[\varepsilon_V \lambda_V \mu_{V|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_V \lambda_V) \mu_{V|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right] \times
      \left[\varepsilon_U \lambda_U \mu_{U|I} (1 - p_\mathrm{sens}) + (1 - \varepsilon_U \lambda_U) \mu_{U|X} p_\mathrm{spec} \right]
      }{
        \left[\varepsilon_U \lambda_U \mu_{U|I} p_\mathrm{sens} + (1 - \varepsilon_U \lambda_U) \mu_{U|X} (1 - p_\mathrm{spec}) \right] \times
        \left[\varepsilon_V \lambda_V \mu_{V|I} (1 - p_\mathrm{sens}) + (1 - \varepsilon_V \lambda_V) \mu_{V|X} p_\mathrm{spec} \right]
      }
\end{align*}

> $$

Reviewer: These equations do not render properly.

If we assume:

- Equal exposure probabilities: $\varepsilon_V = \varepsilon_U$
- Perfect sensitivity and specificity

Then this reduces to:

$$
1 - \frac{\lambda_V (1 - \lambda_U)}{\lambda_U (1 - \lambda_V)}
$$

> In other words, at the cost of estimating VE in terms of an odds ratio rather than a risk ratio, we remove the need to make assumptions about probabilities $\mu$. This removes assumptions about (1) the vaccine preventing progression from infection to symptoms that would drive healthcare seeking and (2) healthcare seeking given the development of symptoms.

Reviewer: This is the crux of our disagreement over whether to include a separate parameter, pi, for immunologically-driven disease progression. Under the same set of assumptions (equal exposure, perfect sensitivity and specificity), 
- when you omit pi and estimate VE_S, the odds ratio does __not__ reduce to the definition of VE_S you desire.
- when you include pi and estimate VE_SP, the odds ratio does reduce to the definition of VE_SP you desire.

This is why I prefer the formulation with pi that claims to estimate VE_SP.

Author: ooh this is important; let me try this. I had assumed you always ended up with perfect confounding (see my comment above)

Does this mean that the RR and the OR estimators are actually estimating different VEs? Let me check that out.

Author: I checked my math again and see that (as you already had derived!) the RR estimator is nothing; it never gets you to the thing you want. I'm cutting that one now.
